docs: run your own analytics with Umami, Fly.io and Neon (#1725)
neondatabase/website: content/guides/self-hosting-umami-neon.md

---
title: Run your own analytics with Umami, Fly.io and Neon
subtitle: Self host your Umami analytics on Fly.io and powered by Neon Postgres
author: rishi-raj-jain
enableTableOfContents: true
createdAt: '2024-05-24T00:00:00.000Z'
updatedOn: '2024-05-24T00:00:00.000Z'
---

In this guide, you will learn how to self host your Umami analytics instance on Fly.io and powered by Neon Postgres as the serverless database.

## Prerequisites

To follow along and deploy the application in this guide, you will need the following:

> - [flyctl](https://fly.io/docs/getting-started/installing-flyctl/) – command-line utility that lets you work with the Fly.io platform. You will also need [a fly.io account](https://fly.io/docs/hands-on/sign-up/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [flyctl](https://fly.io/docs/getting-started/installing-flyctl/) – A command-line utility that lets you work with the Fly.io platform. You will also need [a fly.io account](https://fly.io/docs/hands-on/sign-up/).
```

- [A Neon account](https://console.neon.tech/signup) – The self-hosted Umami analytics instance will connect to a Neon serverless Postgres database 🚀

## Steps

- [What is Umami?](#what-is-umami)
- [Provisioning a Postgres database using Neon](#provisioning-a-postgres-database-using-neon)

> - [Setup Umami instance for Fly.io](#setup-umami-instance-for-flyio)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Set up an Umami instance for Fly.io](#set-up-an-umami-instance-for-flyio)
```

> - [Set Neon Postgres as Serverless Database for Self-Hosted Umami Analytics](#set-neon-postgres-as-serverless-database-for-self-hosted-umami-analytics)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Configure Neon Postgres as serverless database for self-hosted Umami analytics](#set-neon-postgres-as-serverless-database-for-self-hosted-umami-analytics)
```

> - [Deploy To Fly.io](#deploy-to-flyio)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Deploy to Fly.io](#deploy-to-flyio)
```

## What is Umami?

![Umami Analytics Preview](/guides/images/self-hosting-umami-neon/umami.jpeg)

Umami is a simple, fast, privacy-focused, open-source analytics solution. Umami is a better alternative to Google Analytics because it gives you total control of your data and does not violate the privacy of your users. <sup>[[1](https://umami.is/docs)]</sup>

## Provisioning a Postgres Database using Neon

> Using Serverless Postgres database powered by Neon helps you scale down to zero. With Neon, you only have to pay for what you use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using a serverless Postgres database powered by Neon allows you to scale down to zero when the database is not being used, which saves on compute costs.
.
```

> To get started, go to the [Neon console](https://console.neon.tech/app/projects) and enter the name of your choice as the project name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, go to the [Neon Console](https://console.neon.tech/app/projects) and enter a name for your project.
```

> You will then be presented with a dialog that provides a connecting string of your database. Click on **Pooled connection** on the top right of the dialog and the connecting string automatically updates in the box below it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will be presented with a dialog that provides a connection string of your database. Click on the **Pooled connection** option and the connecting string automatically changes to a pooled connection string.
```

![](/guides/images/self-hosting-umami-neon/1689d44f-4c5d-4b2a-8d13-32407f9c8781.png)

All Neon connection strings have the following format:

```bash
postgres://<user>:<password>@<endpoint_hostname>.neon.tech:<port>/<dbname>
```

- `user` is the database user.
- `password` is the database user’s password.

> - `endpoint_hostname` is the host with neon.tech as the [TLD](https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/dns/top-level-domain/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `endpoint_hostname` is the host with neon.tech as the [top level domain (TLD)](https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/dns/top-level-domain/).
```

- `port` is the Neon port number. The default port number is 5432.

> - `dbname` is the name of the database. “neondb” is the default database created with each Neon project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dbname` is the name of the database. “neondb” is the default database created with each Neon project if you don't specify your own database name.
```

> - `?sslmode=require` an optional query parameter that enforces the [SSL](https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/ssl/what-is-ssl/) mode while connecting to the Postgres instance for better security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `?sslmode=require` is an optional query parameter that enforces the [SSL](https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/ssl/what-is-ssl/) mode for better security when connecting to the Postgres instance.
```

> Save this connecting string somewhere safe to be used as the `DATABASE_URL` further as we proceed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please save the connection string somewhere safe. Later, you will use it to configure the `DATABASE_URL` variable.
```

## Setup Umami analytics instance for Fly.io

> To self host your Umami analytics instance, you would use [Umami's pre-built Docker container for Postgres](https://github.com/umami-software/umami/pkgs/container/umami/157800125?tag=postgresql-latest). This will allow you to self host an Umami analytics instance on Fly.io with a single `fly.toml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To self host your Umami analytics instance, you'll use [Umami's pre-built Docker container for Postgres](https://github.com/umami-software/umami/pkgs/container/umami/157800125?tag=postgresql-latest). This will allow you to self host an Umami analytics instance on Fly.io with a single `fly.toml` file.
```

> In your terminal window, execute the following command to create a new directory and change your terminal location to it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your terminal window, execute the following commands to create a new directory and `cd` to it:
```

```bash
mkdir self-host-umami-neon
cd self-host-umami-neon
```

In the directory `self-host-umami-neon`, create a file named `fly.toml` with the following content:

```toml
# File: fly.toml

kill_signal = "SIGINT"
kill_timeout = "5s"

[experimental]
    auto_rollback = true

[build]
    image = "ghcr.io/umami-software/umami:postgresql-latest"

[[services]]
    protocol = "tcp"
    internal_port = 3000
    processes = ["app"]

[[services.ports]]
    port = 80
    handlers = ["http"]
    force_https = true

[[services.ports]]
    port = 443
    handlers = ["tls", "http"]

[services.concurrency]
    type = "connections"
    hard_limit = 25
    soft_limit = 20

[[services.tcp_checks]]
    interval = "15s"
    timeout = "2s"
    grace_period = "1s"
```

> In the `build` property named `image`, you would see that it's pointing to the latest postgres compatible pre-built Docker image of Umami.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `build` property named `image`, you will see that it's pointing to the latest Postgres compatible pre-built Docker image of Umami.
```

> Next, you need to create an app on Fly.io using the configuration present in `fly.toml` file. In your terminal window, execute the following to launch a Fly.io app:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you need to create an app on Fly.io using the configuration present in `fly.toml` file. In your terminal window, execute the following command to launch a Fly.io app:
```

```bash
fly launch
```

On being prompted by CLI to allow copying of the existing configuration into a new app, answer with a `y`:

```bash
An existing fly.toml file was found
? Would you like to copy its configuration to the new app? Yes
```

> Optional: On being prompted by CLI whether you want to tweak the default settings, answer with a `y`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optional: When asked if you want to tweak the default settings, answer with a `y`:
```

```bash
Using build strategies '[the "ghcr.io/umami-software/umami:postgresql-latest" docker image]'. Remove [build] from fly.toml to force a rescan
Creating app in /Users/rishi/Desktop/test
We're about to launch your app on Fly.io. Here's what you're getting:

Organization: Rishi Raj Jain         (fly launch defaults to the personal org)
Name:         test                   (derived from your directory name)
Region:       Mumbai, India          (this is the fastest region for you)
App Machines: shared-cpu-1x, 1GB RAM (most apps need about 1GB of RAM)
Postgres:     <none>                 (not requested)
Redis:        <none>                 (not requested)

? Do you want to tweak these settings before proceeding? Yes
Opening https://fly.io/cli/launch/641f1a1d67950614e4e92820ba484310 ...
```

> flyctl will then automatically take you to a webpage which'll allow you to visually edit the default settings. For example, you can change the app name to `self-host-umami-neon` and change the region to say `ams`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flyctl will then automatically take you to a web page, which allows you to visually edit the default settings. For example, you can change the app name to `self-host-umami-neon`, and change the region to say `ams`.
```

![Fly.io Deployment Setting](/guides/images/self-hosting-umami-neon/307247099-acca8350-75c8-4007-b486-42c4102dfe40.png)

> Click on `Confirm Settings` to set this configuration, and go back to your terminal window. In your terminal window, you should now see an output like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click on `Confirm Settings` to set this configuration, and go back to your terminal window. In your terminal window, you should now see output similar to the following:
```

```bash
Waiting for launch data... Done
Created app 'self-host-umami-neon' in organization 'personal'
Admin URL: https://fly.io/apps/self-host-umami-neon
Hostname: self-host-umami-neon.fly.dev
Wrote config file fly.toml
Validating /Users/rishi/Desktop/test/fly.toml
✓ Configuration is valid
==> Building image
Searching for image 'ghcr.io/umami-software/umami:postgresql-latest' remotely...
image found: img_8rlxp2mjm9g43jqo

Watch your deployment at https://fly.io/apps/self-host-umami-neon/monitoring

Provisioning ips for self-host-umami-neon
  Dedicated ipv6: 2a09:8280:1::2b:b52c:0
  Shared ipv4: 66.241.124.197
  Add a dedicated ipv4 with: fly ips allocate-v4

This deployment will:
 * create 2 "app" machines
```

> Once this is deployed, you are left with just one step, i.e. to set the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable that we obtained in the previous section. Let's get to it in the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the deployment is ready, you are left with just one step &#8212; to set the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable that we obtained in the previous section. We'll do that in the next section.
```

> ## Set Neon Postgres as Serverless Database for Self-Hosted Umami Analytics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configure Neon Postgres as serverless database for self-hosted Umami analytics
```

> In your Fly.io [Dashboard > Apps](https://fly.io/dashboard), click on your app name, and you would be taken to the overview of your app on Fly.io.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your Fly.io [Dashboard > Apps](https://fly.io/dashboard), click on your app name, and you will be taken to the overview of your app on Fly.io.
```

![](/guides/images/self-hosting-umami-neon/307262264-17f870e2-379f-4d80-b37e-6dac9075174c.png)

Click on `Secrets` in the left sidebar, and then click on `New Secret` on the top right corner to start creating an environment variable for your app.

![](/guides/images/self-hosting-umami-neon/307263442-b835f320-8ae8-4a8a-a4f0-dbeb9e07530f.png)

> In the modal, set the name of the secret as `DATABASE_URL` and the `Secret` value to be the one that we obtained the in previous section. Make sure to have `pgbouncer=true&connect_timeout=10` as the query paramters appended to the URL. Click **Set secret** to save the environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the modal, set the name of the secret as `DATABASE_URL`, and set the `Secret` value to be the one that we obtained in the previous section. Click **Set secret** to save the environment variable.
```

![](/guides/images/self-hosting-umami-neon/307263972-75bef039-f4d1-4b7d-a66d-dd312290a6d1.png)

Great! With that done, you have succesfully ensured that each deployment of your app on Fly.io will have the database URL pointing to the Neon Postgres instance. Let's trigger a deploy to see it all in action.

## Deploy To Fly.io

You can now deploy your app to Fly by running the following command:

```bash
flyctl deploy
```

> Once deployed, you will be able to log into your self hosted Umami analytics instance with the default credentials i.e. **admin** as the username & **umami** as the password. You will then be able to create new websites to start analyzing the traffic coming onto your website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once deployed, you will be able to log into your self hosted Umami analytics instance with the default credentials, i.e.; **admin** as the username & **umami** as the password. You will then be able to create new websites and analyze the traffic to those sites.
```

## Summary

> In this guide, you learned how to run your own Umami analytics instance for analytics with Fly.io, powered by Neon postgres as your serverless database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, you learned how to run your own Umami analytics instance for analytics with Fly.io, powered by Neon postgres as your database.
```
